```fig
title = fig 1.0.0
author = adammharris
date = 2026-06-27
updated = 2026-07-04T17:02:34-06:00
part_of = [Devlogs](devlogs.md)
```

# `fig` 1.0.0

Introducing `fig`, the all-in-one library and CLI for configuration files.

`fig` supports:

- JSON (JSONC, JSON5)
- TOML
- YAML (1.2.2)
- and experimental support for XML configuration files.

It is fully spec-compliant for each of these languages, and provides a CLI, bindings for C, Rust, Typescript, and, of course, natively in Zig.

But not only does `fig` parse these languages: it is a complete serializing/deserializing pipeline. And a complete document preserving editor: it can edit without reserializing. `fig` also allows programmatic access of comments, and by default always preserve comments unless a `--strip-comments` flag is provided. It also allows preserving comments across formats:

So all of this actually works:

```bash
$ fig get config.yaml
hello: world
$ fig comment config.yaml --inline hello "this is a comment"
$ fig get config.yaml
hello: world # this is a comment
$ fig get config.yaml -o jsonc
{
  "hello": "world" // this is a comment
}
$ fig edit config.yaml hello everyone
$ fig get config.yaml -o toml
hello = "everyone" # this is a comment
```

It works natively as a shell tool (use `-` to work with stdin):

```bash
$ echo "hello: world" | fig get - -i yaml -o json5
{
  hello: "world"
}
```

And provides a variety of styling options:

```bash
$ fig get config.yaml -o json5 --compact
{hello:"world"}
$ fig get nested.yaml -o json5 --indent 2
{
  hello: "world"
}
```

`fig` is a project created for [Diaryx](https://diaryx.org), which makes use of Markdown files with YAML frontmatter. `fig` functions with these natively via the embed API:

```bash
$ fig get --embed frontmatter-yaml my_file.md author
John Doe
```

YAML frontmatter is autodetected without the `--embed` argument; `fig` can also work with JSON frontmatter and `endmatter`, a YAML code block at the end of a document. The Embed API is also how `fig` supports multi-document YAML.

A command-line interface is only the beginning of the story. `fig`'s Rust and Typescript bindings are robust and feature-complete, and are published on crates.io and the NPM registry. The Rust bindings are used in Diaryx and have replaced `serde` and `serde-yaml` while shrinking the size of the binary by ~500KB. The Rust bindings have extra Rust-specific features: macros for serializing and deserializing, as well as feature-gates for each language (which relies on Zig build options internally).

That's about it for the 1.0.0 release! Here are installation instructions:

## Command-line tool

Install with [Homebrew](https://brew.sh) (macOS only for now):

```bash
brew tap adammharris/tap
brew install fig
```

If you don't have access to Homebrew, you will have to build and install the binary manually. Fortunately, Zig makes this work easily for any platform. [Follow the instructions here.](BUILD.md)

### Zig

Install with `zig fetch --save`:

```bash
zig fetch --save git+https://github.com/adammharris/fig/#v1.0.0
```

Or use a different tag like `#HEAD` for development versions or specific commits.

### Rust/Cargo

Install with `cargo add`:

```bash
cargo add fig
```

It should appear in your `Cargo.toml` with default features. Customize there as you please!

### Typescript/NPM

Install with `npm` or your favorite Javascript package manager:

```bash
npm install @adammharris/fig
```